"""Maratha empire, early modern Indian empire that rose in the 17th century and dominated much of the Indian subcontinent during the 18th century. The Marathas were a Marathi-speaking warrior group mostly from what is now the state of Maharashtra in India. They became politically active under the leadership of Shivaji, their first king, in opposition to the Islamic rulers of the time. The formal Maratha empire began in 1674 with the coronation of Shivaji as Chhatrapati (“Keeper of the Umbrella”) and ended in 1818 after defeat by the English East India Company.

The 17th-century politics in the Indian subcontinent were dominated by multiple Islamic kingdoms, with the Mughal Empire controlling most of north India. The Deccan region of central India had been split among five Deccan sultanates, but by the 1630s only three of them remained active—Bijapur, Golconda, and Ahmadnagar. Shahaji Bhosale was a Maratha general who served these sultanates.

Shivaji, the son of Shahaji, started a campaign to establish Hindavi Svarajya (self-rule of Hindu people) by revolting against the Bijapur sultanate and capturing many forts in the Deccan region. He warred against the Deccan sultanates and the Mughal Empire, as well as the newly emergent English East India Company operating in the ports of western India. Shivaji conquered his first fort in 1645 and eventually established a stable kingdom with the capital at Raigad, with the support of powerful Maratha warrior families. Shivaji’s army was primarily comprised of highly mobile peasant pastoralists. For many years, while Shivaji remained the titular head of the Maratha empire, he was not officially its king, as his coronation had not taken place. It was only in 1674 that Shivaji was crowned as Chhatrapati.

Upon his death, Shivaji was succeeded on the throne by his son Sambhaji, in 1680. Sambhaji was king until 1689, when he was ambushed, captured, and executed by the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb. Aurangzeb also captured Sambhaji’s son Shahu, and Sambhaji’s half-brother Rajaram thus ascended the throne.

Civil war erupted in 1707 after Aurangzeb’s death, when the new Mughal emperor, Bahadur Shah I, released Shahu. Shahu promptly staked his claim to the throne in opposition to Shivaji II (Rajaram’s son), who was ruling with the support of his mother, Tarabai. In 1713 Shahu appointed Balaji Viswanath as his peshwa (chief minister). This began the peshwa era of the Maratha empire, during which all effective power was concentrated in the peshwa. Pune (called Poona during the British raj) in India became the capital of the peshwas. Between 1720 and 1761 the Maratha empire expanded rapidly, gradually taking over Mughal territory. The Marathas took over Malwa and Gujarat in the 1720s and raided Delhi in 1737. At their peak they controlled most of the subcontinent, from Rajasthan and Punjab in the north to Bengal and Orissa in the east and Tanjore in the south. By 1758 they had expanded up to Peshawar in present-day Pakistan. The Maratha king was recognized as the overlord of the Deccan during this period and had the right to levy chauth (literally, “one-fourth”), a 25 percent land revenue tribute from the zamindars (landlords). This phase during the 1740s and ’50s is recognized by heavy tributes levied by the Marathas on local rulers, increasing the hostility to Maratha rule.

In 1761 Ahmad Shah Durrani, the founder of the Durrani empire of Afghanistan, invaded north India. The Maratha army met the Afghan army in the Third Battle of Panipat. Because of past animosities, many local rulers including the Rajputs did not support the Marathas, leading to a heavy Maratha defeat at Panipat. The bulk of the Maratha army was destroyed, and, even though the battle was followed by a peace treaty, it severely diminished Maratha power in the subcontinent.

In the aftermath of the loss at Panipat, Madhavrao I became peshwa and helped rebuild the authority of the Marathas in many of their core territories. To better manage the Maratha empire, he gave autonomy to many of his chieftains, leading to the formation of a Maratha confederacy. Prominent among these were the Gaekwars of Baroda, the Sindhias of Gwalior, and the Holkars of Indore, who all went on to form independent kingdoms after the end of the Maratha empire. But the death of Madhavrao in 1772 created a power vacuum at the centre of the empire. Henceforward, the Maratha chieftains would wield power, the peshwa retaining only titular control.

The later Maratha years were characterized by wars with the kingdom of Mysore and with the East India Company. The First Anglo-Maratha War ran from 1775 to 1782 and ended with a Maratha victory. The First Maratha-Mysore War lasted from 1785 to 1787 and led to animosity with Tippu Sultan, the de facto ruler of Mysore. The Marathas then aided the British in the last two of four Anglo-Mysore wars, helping turn the tide against Mysore and leading to a British victory in 1799. British interventions in the Maratha chieftains’ affairs led to the Second Anglo-Maratha War, from 1803 to 1805, causing significant loss of territory for the Marathas. The Marathas were the last major force opposing the British in the subcontinent, and this came to an end in 1818, with Maratha defeat in the Third Anglo-Maratha War, followed by the exile of the peshwa, Bajirao II, and Maratha territory coming under direct British rule. Some territories such as Baroda and Indore retained titular independence as princely states under the British.

"""